New Blog Post: Elevate Your V Project With Unit Tests (#19)
vlang/vlang-blog: content/blog/elevate-your-v-project-with-unit-tests.md

```

## Wrapping Up

This was a detailed example of how one would go about adding unit tests
to their V projects. Tests are good to have and instil confidence in the
maintainers of a project.

We covered a lot of ground with `geo` but not everything. Here are a list
of things that we did not do:

1. Testing the case when we don't specify a shape. The program will
   pause and prompt the user for input. This needs some careful
   planning to pull off correctly.
2. We did not check for the output of `--version`. This is a simple
   exercise and perhaps not as important to check for.
3. We could have tested for more configurations of command-line inputs.
4. We can have a better variety for the unit tests.

All of these are left as exercises for the interested reader.

Also, note that not all bugs can be eliminated using Unit Tests. There will
always be cases like malformed data, offline databases, failing infrastructure,
and so on that may not be your fault, but your software might need to
be robust enough to handle them. Above all else, user-testing is a must;
this ensures that the product _is_ indeed what the "client" asked for.

> Unit testing is just a very efficient technique (one of many) to remove
> a multitude of potential defects at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit testing is just a very efficient technique (one of many) to detect and prevent
a multitude of potential defects at once.
```

[GitHub](https://github.com/hungrybluedev/geo) and continue with this
article.

## Why Even Bother?

Let's start by addressing the question: _Why even bother with unit tests?_
Here are a few reasons why unit tests make sense:

1. **Unit tests are easy to write.** It's a preventitive measure that prevents
   a lot of bugs from reaching the final product.
2. In order to write effective unit tests, we need to organise our codebase
   into **separate, independent, isolated modules**. This way, we can ensure
   that each of the smaller pieces work correctly on their own, before we try
   to check the entire system as a whole. It saves a lot of time and effort.
3. Splitting the system into manageable pieces also makes it easier to focus
   on **improving the quality of the code independently**, without having to
   rely on the other parts of the system. A team can assign different people
   to different parts of the project and they can all work independently,
   while being confident that things will be fine as long as their code passes
   all the unit tests.
4. Running a unit test (ideally) does not take a long time. This **speeds up**

>    **the iteration process** and helps developers ship their software faster.

Reviewer: Point 1 is not very logical too - unit tests may be easy or hard to write, but that is not related directly to the next sentence "It's a preventitive measure that prevents a lot of bugs from reaching the final product."
Something like this may be better, not sure:
```
1. **Unit tests are easy to write, and can prevent a lot of bugs from reaching the final product.**
```

Points 2-3 are not relevant imho, and are better left out - they are more about the organization of a project (small mostly independent modules), not about testing specifically. One can benefit from testing, even without subscribing to these organizational principles. 

Point 4 may also be reformulated like this:
```
4. Running a unit test usually does not take long, unlike other more extensive kinds of tests.
```
because whether it will speed up, or slow down iterations is also debatable (depends very much on the kind of the work, the experience of the developers, how good the documentation of the used libraries is etc).

5. Unit tests act as a supplement to the documentation and illustrative
   examples. They outline the behaviour of the system, and provide

>    **concrete examples** of how to use the corresponding APIs.

Reviewer: That is a very good point, fully agree.

You can take a look at the Wikipedia article on
[Unit testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_testing)
to learn more about it.

## V's Testing Culture

I joined the V team in 2021. Before that, I had contributed to
the [`rand`](https://modules.vlang.io/rand.html) module along with other devs
which involved writing a lot of unit tests.

It was rather simple to do because all the developers before us had included
a lot of unit tests in vlib that we could use as a reference. This is still valid
today. Whenever we propose the addition of new code to V's standard library,
we make sure to include unit tests for it. Additionally, before merging code
into the main repository, the GitHub Actions CI runner runs a whole bunch of
tests on it, including all the unit tests. This helps make sure that new code
does not break any existing code.

This disciplined manner of software development is good to emulate in all V
projects.

## Prerequisites

We assume that you know your way around the command-line interface. If

> you don't, here a good article to help you get started:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you don't, here is a good article to help you get started:
```

Prior exposure to V is required. You can follow this article
for a quickstart on V: [Getting Started with V](/getting-started-with-v/).

We will pick up from where we left off in the
[previous article](/the-complete-beginners-guide-to-cli-apps-in-v/),
so make sure to have your project set up and ready to go.

Alternatively, you can clone the
[`geo` repository](https://github.com/hungrybluedev/geo), delete the
`test` directory and follow along with the tutorial. More information
on V's support for testing can be found in the
[documentation](https://github.com/vlang/v/blob/master/doc/docs.md#testing).

## A Brief Recap of `geo`

In the [last tutorial](/the-complete-beginners-guide-to-cli-apps-in-v/)
we created a complete command-line application using the built-in `flag`
module. So we already have the directory structure like this:

```text
$ tree .
.
├── geometry
│   ├── metadata.v
│   ├── options.v
│   ├── quadrilateral.v
│   └── triangle.v
├── geo.v
└── v.mod
```

The `v.mod` file anchors the root of the project so that it becomes easier
to use the `geometry` module. It also contains information about the project
itself, like the version, description, license, and so on.

> The `geo.v` contains the main entry point of the application. It processes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`geo.v` contains the main entry point of the application. It processes
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file `geo.v` contains the main entry point of the application. It processes
```

Reviewer: ^ that is another alternative - starting the sentence with just `geo.v` seems weird

the command-line arguments and calls the `generate_shape` function with the
appropriate arguments.

> The `geometry` directory contains the source for out module spread across

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `geometry` directory contains the source for our module spread across
```

multiple files. The `metadata.v` file contains the metadata about the module

> that it reads from the `v.mod`. Next, `options.v` defines the various enums

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that it reads from `v.mod`. Next, `options.v` defines the various enums
```

and helper structs that help standardise the input. Finally, the `triangle.v`
and `quadrilateral.v` files contain the actual code for generating the
desired shapes.

We took an architectural decision to keep the signature of all of the

> shape generation functions same:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shape generation functions the same:
```

> `pub fn generate_xyz(options ShapeOptions) []string`. We will make use
> of this to keep our testing strategy simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pub fn generate_xyz(options ShapeOptions) []string`. We will use that to 
keep our testing strategy simple.
```

## First Steps

First, we create a `test` directory. Then we create a `unit_tests` directory.
Inside that, we create a file `triangle_test.v` in which we will write our

> first test function.

Reviewer: Why so complicated ?
The _test.v files can go directly inside the root folder. There is no need for a special hierarchy just for them.
Testing should be as simple as possible imho, especially in an introductory blog article about it.

Reviewer: It is also an anti-pattern imho to have tests in a separate parallel folder, from the module that they do test.
I really do not understand the reason for the test folder 🤔 .

The general way to proceed is to create a new `ShapeOptions` struct with the
necessary options. Then we obtain the result of calling the required
`generate_xyz()` function. We will then proceed to check if it is the same

> output as we expected. Let's start with the `generate_left_triangle` function.

Reviewer: The general pattern for unit testing, is just:
a) prepare the input for a function, 
b) run the function
c) compare the result of it with an preexisting expected output.

The `ShapeOptions` and `generate_xyz` etc are just particular cases of that more general pattern.

> The final code will be as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The test looks like this:
```

```v {linenos=table}
import geometry

fn test_generate_left_triangle_big_6() {
	opts := geometry.ShapeOptions{
		size: 6
	}
	shape := geometry.generate_left_triangle(opts)
	assert shape == ['*', '**', '***', '****', '*****', '******']
}
```

Notice that we do not have a `module xyz` file at the top. We do not
need this line in our case because we're testing public functions.
However, you may need to test the private (module-only) functions in some
instances. In that case, the test file is put in the same folder as the
source file containing the code you want to test, and the test file
needs to have the module declaration at the top.

You may include a module declaration like `module geometry_test` at
the top of these files but that is not compulsory, as stated before.

> Ideally, you should only be testing the public facing functions so that
> you have room to refactor your code without any users noticing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ideally, you should be testing the public facing functions so that
you have room to refactor your code without any users noticing.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ideally, you should test all public facing functions so that
you have room to refactor your code without any users noticing.
```

A few things are important to note here:

1. The test files need to have a `_test.v` suffix. Otherwise, the V
   testing command will simply ignore the file.

> 2. The functions to be executed must have a `test_` prefix. The rest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The functions to be executed must have a `test_` prefix. Any other function are assumed to be helper functions for the tests.
```

>    of the functions are skipped.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> 3. The `assert (boolean_expression)` statement is the way to check

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. The `assert (boolean_expression)` statement is a way to check
```

   the result of a test. You can use any valid boolean expression you
   want, including but not limited to the comparison operators.

> 4. When we do not include the `module` declaration, we need to `import`
>    it to make the required functions available. This is not necessary
>    when we define the test file right in the module and declare it
>    to be a part of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. When we do not include the `module` declaration, we need to `import`
   it, just like normal code has to import it, to make the required functions 
   available. This is not necessary when we define the test file right in the
   module and declare it to be a part of it.
```

}

// Test to generate a small diamond of size 2 with a custom symbol
fn test_generate_diamond_small_2_custom() {
	opts := geometry.ShapeOptions{
		size: 2
		symbol: `x`
	}
	shape := geometry.generate_diamond(opts)
	assert shape == [' x', 'xxx', ' x']
}

// Invalid diamond
fn test_generate_diamond_invalid() {
	opts := geometry.ShapeOptions{
		size: -1
	}
	shape := geometry.generate_diamond(opts)
	assert shape.len == 0
}

fn test_generate_diamond_unicode_1() {
	opts := geometry.ShapeOptions{
		size: 3
		symbol: `🔼`
	}
	shape := geometry.generate_diamond(opts)
	assert shape == ['  🔼', ' 🔼🔼🔼', '🔼🔼🔼🔼🔼', ' 🔼🔼🔼', '  🔼']
}

fn test_generate_diamond_unicode_2() {
	opts := geometry.ShapeOptions{
		size: 2
		symbol: `শ`
	}
	shape := geometry.generate_diamond(opts)
	assert shape == [' শ', 'শশশ', ' শ']
}

```

The source for `quadrilateral_test.v` is available
[here](https://github.com/hungrybluedev/geo/blob/main/test/unit_tests/quadrilateral_test.v).

### Observations

You might have noticed that we're using unicode characters in the tests.
We've made our implementation robust enough to support them.

You can add more tests if you want. We do not need to consider all the

> possibilities cases. It depends on how they are prioritised. Ideally,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possible cases. It depends on how they are prioritized. Ideally,
```

every single public facing function should have an accompanying unit
test, and the test suite must execute all of the relevant lines in the
project (which we refer to as _coverage_).

Practically, we settle for certain thresholds (like 90% coverage), or unit
testing only the critical, unchanging components. If you're in a team, listen
to what your senior says. If you're the senior, don't set unrealistic
expectations for your team, or yourself.

## BONUS: Testing The Output of External Commands

Until now, we assessed the correctness of our implementation my testing

> the functions of the `geometry` module directly. We would also like to

Reviewer: tests can not prove the correctness of something, only that it does not fail for some known cases

Reviewer: perhaps `we assessed that our implementation is not obviously wrong, by testing`

Reviewer: in any case `my testing` should be `by testing`

> make sure the program can compile and generate coherent output. In order
> to test this, we can spawn a new process from V and compare the output
> of the child process to our expected results.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
make sure the program can compile and generate coherent output. In order
to test this, we can make our test, compile and run a separate V program, and
compare its output to our expected results.

```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make sure the program can compile and generate coherent output. In order
to test this, we can make our test compile and run a separate V program, and
compare its output to our expected results.

```
Of course, this is functional testing, rather than unit testing.

Reviewer: yes

spawn a new subprocess that will run the `v test .` command. However,
we need to take a few extra steps to make sure that we can actually
run the command properly on all systems. Next, we store the output
of the process and see if it contains a list of terms that we
specify in an array.

In a new directory called `command_line_tests` in the `tests` folder,
we create a new file `help_text_test.v`:

```v {linenos=table}
import os

const (
	output_search_terms = [
		'Usage',
		'Description',
		'Options',
		'-p, --shape <string>',
		'-z, --size <int>',
		'-m, --symbol <string>',
		'-h, --help',
		'--version',
	]
)

fn test_help() {
	flags := ['--help', '-h']

	for flag in flags {
		result := os.execute_or_panic('${os.quoted_path(@VEXE)} run . $flag')

		assert result.exit_code == 0
		for term in output_search_terms {
			assert result.output.contains(term)
		}
	}
}

```

Note that we do not simply use `'v run . $flag'`. This is because we may
be testing a development version of V that is not symlinked or added to path.
The `@VEXE` term is a compile-time constant that provides the path to the
V executable currently being run. Additionally, there may be instances

> where people have `$` in their paths. In order to avoid confusing the

Reviewer: or spaces

> compiler, we use `os.quoted_path` to escape the path.

Reviewer: it does not escape it, it quotes it

matches any single character. They are *NOT* regular expressions however.
```

Let's try it on our project!

```text
$ v test . -run-only test_all_options
---- Testing... ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 OK     221.005 ms /path/to/geo/test/command_line_tests/multi_option_test.v
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary for all V _test.v files: 1 passed, 1 total. Runtime: 221 ms, on 1 job.

$ v test . -run-only *generate*
---- Testing... ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 OK    [1/2]   231.238 ms /path/to/geo/test/unit_tests/quadrilateral_test.v
 OK    [2/2]   240.615 ms /path/to/geo/test/unit_tests/triangle_test.v
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary for all V _test.v files: 2 passed, 2 total. Runtime: 241 ms, on 2 parallel jobs.
```

## Wrapping Up

This was a detailed example of how one would go about adding unit tests
to their V projects. Some teams may practice **Test Driven Development**
where the unit tests are written before the actual implementation to

> ensure that the API design goal is met. In any case, tests are good to

Reviewer: the sentence about Test Driven Development can be deleted imho

Reviewer: then the next sentence can become just:
`Tests are good to have and instill confidence in the maintainers of a project.`
The users of a project do not care at all usually how the sausage is made.

> have and instil confidence in the users of a project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have and instill confidence in the users of a project.
```

Author: This is a matter of American English v/s British English: https://writingexplained.org/instill-vs-instil-difference

Reviewer: Prefer the American version, it is more common.
